=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

grealize - A gaussoid to realization space compiler

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    grealize -t pd  [-f FORMAT] -- GAUSSOID
    grealize -t sem [-f FORMAT] -- DIGRAPH... GAUSSOID

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-t>, B<--type>

The type of realization space to describe:

=over

=item *

I<pd>: realizations by real, positive-definitive matrices.

=item *

I<sem>: realizations by structural equation models (SEM) having
uncorrelated, normalized noise terms.

=back

The default is I<pd>.

=item B<-f>, B<--format>

How to format the realization space description:

=over

=item *

I<mathematica>: suitable for input into Wolfram Mathematica.

=back

The default is I<mathematica>.

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program takes as input a gaussoid (ordinary or oriented) as a string of
either C<0> and C<1> or C<0>, C<+> and C<-> ASCII characters. Each character
represents the sign assigned to a 2-face of the n-cube according to the ordering
of 2-faces used by L<https://gaussoids.de>.

The program then compiles and prints a description of a realization space of
this (oriented) gaussoid. The notion of realization and the output format are
configurable.

=head1 EXAMPLES

Print the semialgebraic system that describes the classical realization space
(positive-definite covariance matrices) of the positively oriented empty
4-gaussoid suitable for input into Wolfram Mathematica:

    $ grealize -t pd -f mathematica -- $(perl -e 'print "+" x 24')
    S = (1) > 0 &&
      (1) > 0 &&
      ...
      (1 + -1*a^2) > 0 &&
      (1 + -1*b^2) > 0 &&
      ...
      (1 + -1*a^2 + -1*b^2 + 2*a*b*d + -1*d^2) > 0 &&
      (1 + -1*a^2 + -1*c^2 + 2*a*c*e + -1*e^2) > 0 &&
      ...
      (1 + -1*a^2 + -1*b^2 + -1*c^2 + 2*a*b*d + -1*d^2 + c^2*d^2 + 2*a*c*e + -2*b*c*d*e + -1*e^2 + b^2*e^2 + 2*b*c*f + -2*a*c*d*f + -2*a*b*e*f + 2*d*e*f + -1*f^2 + a^2*f^2) > 0 &&
      (a) > 0 &&
      (a + -1*b*d) > 0 &&
      ...

Semialgebraic system for the space of parameters of an SEM (with uncorrelated
noise of variance 1) for the 4-path as a DAG, which satisfies the constraints
of the attached 4-gaussoid (which is the d-separation graphoid of the DAG):

    $ grealize -t sem -- 12 23 34 111110101000111111001111

This effectively describes the "generic part" of the Gaussian structural
equation model of the 4-path. By picking orientations of this gaussoid,
positive or negative correlations can be imposed on the model, extracting
subcomponents of this generic part.

=head1 AUTHOR

Tobias Boege <tobs@taboege.de>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This software is copyright (C) 2020 by Tobias Boege.

This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the Artistic License 2.0.
